Investigating Grokking at the Edge of Linear Separability
REading abstaract,

Asked Chat
 Can you explain what the origin is in this paper on Linear seperability?

 Even though a perfect generalizing solution always exists,
we prove the implicit bias of the logisitc loss will cause the model to overfit if the training data
is linearly separable from the origin. For training sets that are not separable from the origin, the
model will always generalize perfectly asymptotically, but overfitting may occur at early stages of
training.

Answer:
In the context of this paper on linear separability, the term "origin" refers to the point in the feature space where all the feature values are zero. In simple terms, it's the point (0,0,...,0) in a multi-dimensional space.

Here’s a breakdown of the key ideas in the passage:

    Linear Separability from the Origin: This means that the data points can be perfectly divided by a linear boundary, such as a line or hyperplane, that doesn't pass through the origin. In other words, the two classes of data (for classification problems) can be separated by a straight line, but the line isn't constrained to go through the point (0,0,...,0).

    Effect on Model Behavior:

        If the data is linearly separable from the origin, the implicit bias of the logistic loss will cause the model to overfit. This is because when the model has a perfect separation between classes, it tends to keep adjusting the weights excessively, even after it has already found a solution that separates the classes. This overfitting can happen since logistic regression keeps pushing for a higher confidence on predictions, even after separating the data.

        On the other hand, if the data is not separable from the origin, the model will eventually generalize perfectly (asymptotically). This means that the model will, over time, converge to a solution that performs well on unseen data. However, overfitting might still occur in the early stages of training before the model stabilizes and finds a good boundary.

In summary, the reference to the "origin" highlights whether the linear boundary used to classify the data passes through the point where all features are zero, and this has implications on how the model fits and generalizes.



I know know whtat I don't understand why an origin is necessary or the setup of the paper. I know there are two classes and the model is only using a singl line to try to serpate them. 
I don't know how it generates the line. It could indicate the tipping point where the model always chooses class 0 over class 1.


To get to the point where I can make a model in colab and display that I understand the concept, I need to be able to generate a environment like the paper and apply whatever technique they are suggesting.

Potential insite: It oculd be that this binary classificaiotn is a toy model. Multi classification will require a lot more dimensions but the principle of how the classes are seperated may be the same. I say this because in higher dimensions there are many more "right" angles. 

Potential insite: If I can identify uses cases for this paper automatically in certain AI models, such as when a model is very good in trainig at a task but terrible in implementation, I could use a search function to identify which classes are confusing and computationally detect if Grokking will work. 

From what I understand, the data must be linearly seperatable from the origin. I other word, the origin must be roughly in the center of the data distribution. if it is far outside or highly skewed, grokking will likely never occure. 


While its seems the paper's discovery is very simple: When trying to classify binary classes in a isotropic normal distrbution with very noisy features. Assumming number of features < 1/2 * N, Grokking will likely occure. 
But there seems to be so much more observations in the paper that seem unrelated to teh conlcusins given. Some appear to focus on the time to convergence and how to calculate it. 
